#Sentiment Analysis

Sentiment analysis refers to the process of computationally identifying and categorizing opinions from a piece of text and determining whether the writer’s attitude towards a particular topic or a product is negative, positive, or neutral. Or in other words, it is a text analysis method that detects the polarity within the text, whether it be a whole document, paragraph, or sentence.

But why is it important?

Every minute of every day we are generating 28k gigabytes of data, as more and more companies hop onto the ever-expanding online platforms. They are collecting this data to understand where they and their product stands with their consumers. Moreover, the businesses that are leading the charge in their industries are the ones that are mining this data and analyzing it to make decisions to grow their consumer pool. The data collected can range from survey forms to social media conversations. 

Sentiment analysis can be broadly classified into the following categories:

###1. Fine-Grained Sentiment Analysis

In this type of analysis, the polarities are further divided to give a finer or accurate analysis. For instance, instead of having three categories/measures on the polarity scale, we have five:

-very positive
-positive
-neutral
-negative
-very negative

And instead of assigning values from +1 to -1, we use a 5 point or 5-star review system.

###2. Emotion Detection

Here we try to discern the writer's emotions, happiness, sadness, anger, irritation, or other emotions. Many such algorithms are based on lexicons or machine learning algorithms. But as fun as it sounds to be, it does have its downside; one of them being the fact that people emote in different ways. This difference may exist due to different languages, cultures, or even generations.

###3. Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis

This particular type of analysis is employed when a company strives to know in what light a specific feature or aspect of their product is being held by its consumers.

###4. Multilingual Sentiment Analysis

Multilingual sentiment analysis can be challenging. Not only given the fact that there is the usage of multiple languages but also because data tends to be noisy. Moreover, sometimes the same words in different languages can express various emotions. 

##Work Cited
Choudhary, N., Singh, R., Bindlish, I., & Shrivastava, M. (2018). Sentiment analysis of code-mixed languages leveraging resource rich languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00806.
